The image of Maheshmurti at Elephanta dates back to the early
sixth century CE. It is located in the main cave shrine. In the
tradition of western Deccan sculpting it is one of the best
examples of qualitative achievement in sculpting images in rock-
cut caves. The image is large in size. The central head is the
main Shiva figure whereas the other two visible heads are of
Bhairava and Uma. The central face is in high relief having a
round face, thick lips and heavy eyelids. The lower lip is
prominently protruded showing a very different characteristic.
The all-inclusive aspect of Shiva is exhibited in this sculpture
by soft-modelling, smooth surface and large face. The face of
Shiva-Bhairava is clearly shown in profile in anger with bulging
eye and mustache. The other face showing feminine characters
is of Uma who is the consort of Shiva. One of the shilpa texts
mentions five integrated faces of Shiva and this image, despite
being shown with only three faces, is considered as of the same
variety and the top and back faces are deemed as invisible. Each
face has a different crown as per its iconographic prescription.
This sculpture has been sculpted on the south wall of the cave
along with the sculpture of Ardhanarishwara and the
Gangadhara panel. Elephanta sculptures are known for their
remarkable qualities of surface smoothness, elongation and
rhythmic movement. Their composition is very complex. The
iconographic arrangement of this cave is replicated in Cave No.
29 at Ellora.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
