The temples at Khajuraho are all made of sandstone. They were patronised
by the Chandella  dynasty. The Lakshamana temple represents the full-
fledged, developed style of temple architecture during the time of the
Chandellas. Its construction was completed by 954, the year as per the
inscription found at the base of the temple, by Yashovarman, the seventh
ruler of the Chandella dynasty. The temple plan is of a panchayana type.
The temple is constructed on a heavy plinth. It consists of an
ardhamandapa (porch), mandapa (porch), the maha mandapa (greater hall)
and the garbhagriha with vimana.  Each part has a separate roof rising
backward. All the halls have projected porches on their walls but are not
accessible to visitors. Their use is functional, mainly for light and
ventilation. The outer walls of the garbhagriha and the outer and inner
walls around the circumambulatory path are decorated with sculptures.
The shikhara on the garbhagriha is tall. The Khajuraho temples are also
known for their erotic sculptures. Many erotic sculptures are carved on
the plinth wall. Some erotic sculptures are carved on the actual wall of
the temple. Tier arrangements on the walls provide a very specific space
for the placement of the images. The interior halls are also decorated
profusely. The entrance to the garbhagriha is sculpted with heavy
voluminous pillars and lintels carved with small images as part of the
door decoration. An image of Chaturmukha Vishnu is in the garbhagriha.
There are four shrines in each corner of the temple. There are images of
Vishnu in three shrines and Surya in one, which can be identified by the
central image on the lintel of the shrine-doors. Drapery and ornaments
are given a lot of attention.
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
