AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
90
Nalanda University
Founded in 1336, Vijayanagara, literally ‘city of victory’,
attracted a number of international travellers such as the
Italian, Niccolo di Conti, the Portuguese Domingo Paes,
Fernao Nuniz and Duarte Barbosa and the Afghan Abd, al-
Razzaq, who have left vivid accounts of the city. In addition,
various Sanskrit and Telugu works document the vibrant
literary tradition of this kingdom. Architecturally,
Vijayanagara synthesises the centuries-old dravida temple
architecture with Islamic styles demonstrated by the
neighbouring sultanates. Their sculpture too, although
fundamentally derived from, and consciously seeking to
recreate Chola ideals, occasionally shows the presence of
foreigners. Their eclectic ruins from the late fifteenth and
early sixteenth centuries preserve a fascinating time in
history, an age of wealth, exploration and cultural fusion.
BUDDHIST AND JAIN ARCHITECTURAL DEVELOPMENTS
So far, although we have focused on the nature of
developments in Hindu architecture from the fifth to
fourteenth centuries, it must constantly be kept in mind
that this was also the very period when Buddhist and Jain
developments were equally vibrant, and often went hand-
